README.md, before:

# Thai TTS (TH TTS)

## Model Attribution

All model weights are provided by [VIZINTZOR](https://huggingface.co/VIZINTZOR) via Hugging Face:

- **VITS Thai Female/Male**:  
  [MMS-TTS-THAI-FEMALEV2](https://huggingface.co/VIZINTZOR/MMS-TTS-THAI-FEMALEV2),  
  [MMS-TTS-THAI-MALEV2](https://huggingface.co/VIZINTZOR/MMS-TTS-THAI-MALEV2)
- **F5-TTS Thai**:  
  [F5-TTS-THAI](https://huggingface.co/VIZINTZOR/F5-TTS-THAI)  
  [F5-TTS-TH-V2](https://huggingface.co/VIZINTZOR/F5-TTS-TH-V2)

Please acknowledge and cite VIZINTZOR if you use these models in your work.

---

## Recommended Model

**For best quality and performance, use F5-TTS v1.**

---

## How to Run

You can run the server using either direct `uv` commands or the provided `entrypoint.sh` script (recommended for Docker and easy switching).

### 1. Using `uv` Directly

#### VITS Thai (Female/Male)

```bash
uv run python src/wyoming_thai_vits.py --log-level INFO --host 0.0.0.0 --port 10200 \
  --model-id VIZINTZOR/MMS-TTS-THAI-FEMALEV2

uv run python src/wyoming_thai_vits.py --log-level INFO --host 0.0.0.0 --port 10200 \
  --model-id VIZINTZOR/MMS-TTS-THAI-MALEV2
```

#### F5-TTS Thai v1 (**Recommended**)

```bash
uv run python src/wyoming_thai_f5.py --log-level INFO --host 0.0.0.0 --port 10200 \
  --model-version v1
```

#### F5-TTS Thai v2

```bash
uv run python src/wyoming_thai_f5.py --log-level INFO --host 0.0.0.0 --port 10200 \
  --model-version v2
```

### 2. Using `entrypoint.sh` (Recommended)

Set the backend via `THTTS_BACKEND` environment variable:

- `VITS` for VITS model
- `F5_V1` for F5-TTS v1 (**recommended**)
- `F5_V2` for F5-TTS v2

Example:

```bash
THTTS_BACKEND=F5_V1 ./entrypoint.sh
```

You can override other parameters via environment variables (see below).

---

## Environment Variables

| Variable              | Default Value                                 | Description                                      |
|-----------------------|-----------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------|
| `THTTS_BACKEND`       | `VITS`                                        | Model backend: `VITS`, `F5_V1`, or `F5_V2`       |
| `THTTS_HOST`          | `0.0.0.0`                                     | Bind address                                     |
| `THTTS_PORT`          | `10200`                                       | Port to listen on                                |
| `THTTS_LOG_LEVEL`     | `INFO`                                        | Log level (`DEBUG`, `INFO`, etc.)                |
| `THTTS_MODEL`         | `VIZINTZOR/MMS-TTS-THAI-FEMALEV2`             | VITS model ID                                    |
| `THTTS_REF_AUDIO`     | `hf_sample`                                   | F5 reference audio path                          |
| `THTTS_REF_TEXT`      | *(empty)*                                     | F5 reference transcript                          |
| `THTTS_DEVICE`        | `auto`                                        | `auto`, `cpu`, or `cuda`                         |
| `THTTS_SPEED`         | `1.0`                                         | F5 speech speed multiplier                       |
| `THTTS_NFE_STEPS`     | `32`                                          | F5 denoising steps                               |
| `THTTS_MAX_CONCURRENT`| `1`                                           | Max concurrent synth requests                    |
| `THTTS_CKPT_FILE`     | *(auto-selected by backend)*                  | F5 checkpoint file path                          |
| `THTTS_VOCAB_FILE`    | *(auto-selected by backend)*                  | F5 vocab file path                               |


## 3. Docker Compose (NVIDIA GPU)

```yaml
services:
  thtts:
    image: ghcr.io/zen3515/thtts:latest
    container_name: thtts
    restart: unless-stopped
    shm_size: "2g" # please adjust
    environment:
      - THTTS_BACKEND=F5_V1
      - THTTS_HOST=0.0.0.0
      - THTTS_PORT=10200
      - THTTS_LOG_LEVEL=INFO
      - THTTS_DEVICE=auto
      - NVIDIA_VISIBLE_DEVICES=all
      - NVIDIA_DRIVER_CAPABILITIES=compute,utility
    ports:
      - "10200:10200"
    deploy:
      resources:
        reservations:
          devices:
            - driver: nvidia
              count: all
              capabilities: [gpu]
```

**Note:**  
- Make sure you have [NVIDIA Container Toolkit](https://docs.nvidia.com/datacenter/cloud-native/container-toolkit/latest/install-guide.html) installed.
- Adjust the `THTTS_BACKEND` and other environment variables as needed.

---

## How to Test

### Query Info

```bash
printf '{"type":"describe","data":{}}\n' | nc 127.0.0.1 10200
```

### Synthesize Speech

Just connect it to homeassistant, it's probably the most up to spec with wyoming protocol

---


## License

See individual model pages on Hugging Face for license details.

Commit message:

Properly preprocess input text, and re-do streaming

README.md, after:

# THTTS (Thai TTS)

This project is the first implementation of Text-to-Speech (TTS) in Thai using the Wyoming protocol, making it fully compatible with Home Assistant. It enables local, streaming Thai voice synthesis for smarter automations and AI assistants—no cloud required.

Bring your local AI to life in Thai language with seamless integration, low latency, and privacy-first design.

## Model Attribution

All model weights are provided by [VIZINTZOR](https://huggingface.co/VIZINTZOR) via Hugging Face:

- **VITS Thai Female/Male**:  
  [MMS-TTS-THAI-FEMALEV2](https://huggingface.co/VIZINTZOR/MMS-TTS-THAI-FEMALEV2),  
  [MMS-TTS-THAI-MALEV2](https://huggingface.co/VIZINTZOR/MMS-TTS-THAI-MALEV2)
- **F5-TTS Thai**:  
  [F5-TTS-THAI](https://huggingface.co/VIZINTZOR/F5-TTS-THAI)  
  [F5-TTS-TH-V2](https://huggingface.co/VIZINTZOR/F5-TTS-TH-V2)

Please acknowledge and cite VIZINTZOR if you use these models in your work.

---

## Recommended Model

**For best quality and performance, use F5-TTS v1.**

---

## How to Run

You can run the server using either direct `uv` commands or the provided `entrypoint.sh` script (recommended for Docker and easy switching).

### 1. Using `uv` Directly

#### VITS Thai (Female/Male)

```bash
uv run python src/wyoming_thai_vits.py --log-level INFO --host 0.0.0.0 --port 10200 \
  --model-id VIZINTZOR/MMS-TTS-THAI-FEMALEV2

uv run python src/wyoming_thai_vits.py --log-level INFO --host 0.0.0.0 --port 10200 \
  --model-id VIZINTZOR/MMS-TTS-THAI-MALEV2
```

#### F5-TTS Thai v1 (**Recommended**)

```bash
uv run python src/wyoming_thai_f5.py --log-level INFO --host 0.0.0.0 --port 10200 \
  --model-version v1
```

#### F5-TTS Thai v2

```bash
uv run python src/wyoming_thai_f5.py --log-level INFO --host 0.0.0.0 --port 10200 \
  --model-version v2
```

### 2. Using `entrypoint.sh` (Recommended)

Set the backend via `THTTS_BACKEND` environment variable:

- `VITS` for VITS model
- `F5_V1` for F5-TTS v1 (**recommended**)
- `F5_V2` for F5-TTS v2

Example:

```bash
THTTS_BACKEND=F5_V1 ./entrypoint.sh
```

You can override other parameters via environment variables (see below).

---

## Environment Variables

| Variable                | Default Value                                 | Description                                      |
|-------------------------|-----------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------|
| `THTTS_BACKEND`         | `VITS`                                        | Model backend: `VITS`, `F5_V1`, or `F5_V2`       |
| `THTTS_HOST`            | `0.0.0.0`                                     | Bind address                                     |
| `THTTS_PORT`            | `10200`                                       | Port to listen on                                |
| `THTTS_LOG_LEVEL`       | `INFO`                                        | Log level (`DEBUG`, `INFO`, etc.)                |
| `THTTS_MODEL`           | `VIZINTZOR/MMS-TTS-THAI-FEMALEV2`             | VITS model ID                                    |
| `THTTS_REF_AUDIO`       | `hf_sample`                                   | F5 reference audio path                          |
| `THTTS_REF_TEXT`        | *(empty)*                                     | F5 reference transcript                          |
| `THTTS_DEVICE`          | `auto`                                        | `auto`, `cpu`, or `cuda`                         |
| `THTTS_SPEED`           | `1.0`                                         | F5 speech speed multiplier                       |
| `THTTS_NFE_STEPS`       | `32`                                          | F5 denoising steps                               |
| `THTTS_MAX_CONCURRENT`  | `1`                                           | Max concurrent synth requests                    |
| `THTTS_CKPT_FILE`       | *(auto-selected by backend)*                  | F5 checkpoint file path                          |
| `THTTS_VOCAB_FILE`      | *(auto-selected by backend)*                  | F5 vocab file path                               |
| `THTTS_SPEAK_SPEED`     |                                               |                                                  |
| `THTTS_MAX_WAIT_MS`     |                                               |                                                  |
| `THTTS_MIN_SENT_CHARS`  |                                               |                                                  |   


## 3. Docker Compose (NVIDIA GPU)

```yaml
services:
  thtts:
    image: ghcr.io/zen3515/thtts:latest
    container_name: thtts
    restart: unless-stopped
    shm_size: "2g" # please adjust
    environment:
      - THTTS_BACKEND=F5_V1
      - THTTS_HOST=0.0.0.0
      - THTTS_PORT=10200
      - THTTS_LOG_LEVEL=INFO
      - THTTS_DEVICE=auto
      - NVIDIA_VISIBLE_DEVICES=all
      - NVIDIA_DRIVER_CAPABILITIES=compute,utility
    ports:
      - "10200:10200"
    deploy:
      resources:
        reservations:
          devices:
            - driver: nvidia
              count: all
              capabilities: [gpu]
```

**Note:**  
- Make sure you have [NVIDIA Container Toolkit](https://docs.nvidia.com/datacenter/cloud-native/container-toolkit/latest/install-guide.html) installed.
- Adjust the `THTTS_BACKEND` and other environment variables as needed.

---

## How to Test

### Query Info

```bash
printf '{"type":"describe","data":{}}\n' | nc 127.0.0.1 10200
```

### Synthesize Speech

Just connect it to homeassistant, it's probably the most up to spec with wyoming protocol

---


## License

See individual model pages on Hugging Face for license details.
